---
title: "Getting the Fundamentals Right: Introduction"
abstract:
  "Everybody likes to talk about the importance of fundamentals, but concrete
  steps are often lacking. Reflecting on two years of coding, I delve into the
  pivotal role of mastering HTML, CSS nad JavaScript. This introuction focuses
  on creating robust mental models and memorable metaphors, essential steps for
  beginners and seasoned professionals alike."
publishedOn: "2023-12-20"
category: "tech"
---

After some time of coding (two years to be exact), after overcoming many
hurdles, and frustration and finally getting to calmer waters, you start to
think about the steps that led you to where you currently are in your career,
and about the next steps that will lead you further to where you want to be.
What keeps coming to my mind is a term that's often heard in the world of
programming, the fundamentals. A lot of people by now are probably sick and
tired of hearing about the fundamentals, but there's a good reason why they are
frequently mentioned.

As a self-taught front-end developer, there are a lot gaping holes in my
knowledge when it comes to programming. A way to close those gaps is to get good
at the fundamentals. Hopefully, in time, I'll manage to patch the holes in my
general knowledge of programming, algorithms and computer science, but right
now, I'll be focusing on the fundamentals of front-end development: HTML, CSS
and JavaScript. My goal here is to create a guide that would have helped me when
I started learning web development.

### Emphasizing the "mental" in fundamental

When learning a new skill or honing an existing one, it's necessary to have a
good mental model, or a good way of thinking about a certain topic. Naturally,
introspection, examination of one's thoughts and/or feelings, is key in this
regard since we need to be aware of our way of thinking about a certain topic.

It's odd that sometimes we experience some kind of internal struggle, resistance
even, when trying to establish a good mental model by dismissing our attempts to
think too much about a particular topic, thinking that we already understand it,
and that it's time to move on to something else. However, let's try to persist
in this state, and struggle against our internal resistance, as it may unveil
the flaws or gaps in our understanding.

When dealing with abstractions (and programming is all about abstractions), it's
important to draw parallels with the real world, with the human condition, and
one of the best ways to accomplish this is to use metaphors. By using metaphors
and juxtapositions we are able to create memorable mental models for complex
concepts like HTML, CSS and JavaScript. So let's start by doing just that.

### The house metaphor

Imagine our website as a house. The house has a foundation, walls, windows, a
door, and a roof with a chimney. The structure of the house is the HTML, all of
the colors of the house, the color of the roof, the house, the windows are the
CSS, and the functionality of the house is the JavaScript. Try interacting with
the chimney, the windows, and see what happens.

<HouseDemo />
