---
title: "My first post and the journey so far"
abstract:
  "In this inaugural blog post, I celebrate the culmination of a nine-month web
  development journey with the launch of my website. Crafted using TypeScript,
  Next.js, and Chakra UI, the site reflects my evolution from HTML novice to a
  confident developer. Explore my process and growth in this post."
publishedOn: "2022-04-11"
category: "career"
---

I did it! After nine months of intensive learning, I launched my own website
where I can showcase my work, effort, and thoughts which are sometimes trapped
or fade on this never-ending path of learning web development. The website has
been built with JavaScript's typed superset,
[TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/), [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/),
the [React](https://reactjs.org/) framework, and for styling,
[Chakra UI](https://chakra-ui.com/), the modular component library for React.

I've built this website completely from scratch, however, this does not mean
that I haven't had some help along the way. This website is basically an amalgam
of all of the knowledge that I've accumulated thus far. Here, in this first blog
post, I would like to dissect the building process of the website. This will not
only provide you with the website's blueprint, but also give you an overview of
my journey so far. So let's take a step back.

### First Steps

My first encounter with web development was as part of my job in September 2020
with HTML when I attempted to improve the website (subdomain of the official
website) of the international relations office at the University of Zadar. I
wanted to have more influence on the structure of our website, and the overall
way in which information was presented. A big issue which we had at that time
was that students were getting lost on the website. They would dig through a
heap of information in order to find what they were looking for, and eventually
they would give up and come to the office to ask for the information in person
instead. Not a great user experience, I would say. Unfortunately, the editing
and shaping of the website for my colleagues and myself was somewhat limited
only to changing the content via a content management system (CMS). This little
research into HTML, however, opened up a door for me, and I was intrigued by the
vast possibilities of web development.

Still, this wasn't the moment for me to make the switch, and fully commit to web
development. My wife and I were expecting a child at that time, and shifting
focus to changing my career did not seem appropriate. Fast-forward to July 2021,
our daughter was already three months old. Having a child changes one's
perspective, and you start thinking more about the future. Your effort and your
need to contribute more rise exponentially.

At that time, I wasn't satisfied with my job, my career as a literary translator
did not pan out, since it was very niche, and difficult to get in that closed
circle. Either way, the job at the office was always supposed to be a temporary
solution for my employment. It was difficult to break through, and due to the
situation in my country where political affiliation is more appreciated than
grit and diligence, I felt frustrated and stuck. I was not able to move forward
and progress the way I intended. Something had to change. There had to be a
profession, I thought to myself, where these qualities were appreciated, and
where one could progress and climb up the ladder through hard work alone. Enter
web development, again. It seemed like a viable option, one that had many
benefits, so I did a 180, and decided to become a web developer.

### Planning it All Out: The Six-Month

The first thing which I needed to decide was what kind of web developer will I
be: front-end or back-end. Why not do both and become a full-stack developer,
you may ask. I believe that it's initially more important to specialize, and
then as you grow more confident in your skills and your domain, you can decide
to expend your area of expertise. But back to the matter at hand. I'm more of a
visual type of person, and I'm always obsessed with how things look and how they
are presented. Also, I liked to draw for as long as I can remember, so becoming
a front-end developer seemed like the obvious choice. Creating a website from
scratch, and being able to interact with it, I saw as an exciting endeavor.
Though at that moment all of that seemed like a distant future for me. The
different tools one could use and different direction in which one could go was
quite overwhelming at first. And because of this, I believe that having a mentor
is crucial for the whole process of learning web development and getting your
first job as a web developer. Luckily, my cousin Adrian is a front-end developer
who guided me in this process, and gave me the moral support when it was most
needed. Without any feedback, realistically, you do not know what you are doing,
you're typing into the void, so to say. Sure, you might be following some
tutorials, coding along, and feeling like you're making some progress, but
realistically speaking, if you do not break away from the embrace of
[tutorial hell](https://dev.to/chrisbenjamin/escaping-tutorial-hell-ncd#:~:text=What%20is%20tutorial%20hell%3F,is%20doing%20and%20it%20works.),
your progress will be slow, and the frustration will only increase.

The crucial ingredient of learning is making mistakes and errors, and learning
from them. I've gone through my share of tutorial hell, and just recently I've
managed to break out of it, and start working on a crypto app and this website.
Naturally, in the beginning, you're insecure, you don't know where to begin, and
someone needs to hold your hand through this process, and some choose to find
comfort, and a sense of progression in tutorials and courses. And that's
completely acceptable, I've also gone along that road, and when I think about
the whole process of learning, there's not much that I would change. I needed to
accumulate some knowledge, and to build up the courage to start building
projects on my own. For me, going through the tutorials and courses was a
necessary step, and I learned a lot from them.

So in July 2021, I started planning the whole learning path and getting my first
job as a web developer step-by-step. I gave myself a deadline of six months to
learn as much as I can while also working in the international relations office.
In the meantime, the plan was also to start applying for some jobs as well even
though I didn't feel ready. I applied for maybe one or two positions, and only
got a response from one of them. Unfortunately, I did not expect a response at
all, so I did not see a message from one of the recruiters who reached out to me
on LinkedIn. Side note: check your inboxes, and your spam regularly. In general,
that's maybe one of the few things that I would change in regards to my learning
path; apply more. Another thing which I would have changed is to use more
version control systems such as Git at the beginning of my learning process.
It's important to incorporate this into your workflow early on, but more on this
later.

In July and August 2021, I learned HTML and CSS through a couple of courses. The
first two "Introduction to HTML" and "Introduction to CSS" were online courses
by the University of Computing Centre in Zagreb via their website. After that, I
went through "The Ultimate HTML5 and CSS3 Series" by Mosh Hamedani on his
website, and "Modern HTML and CSS From the Beginning (Including Sass)" by Brad
Traversy on Udemy. From this course on, all of the courses that I took, were on
the Udemy learning platform.

In September 2021, I began learning JavaScript through a lengthy course called
"The Complete JavaScript Course 2021: From Zero to Expert!" by Jonas Schedtmann.
Since I saw the importance of JavaScript as a programming language, as the main
pillar of front-end development, and web in general, I went through the course
slowly, and took a lot of notes. It took me more than two months to complete the
sixty-eight-hour course.

Naturally, after that in December 2021, I would say that the necessary phase of
my tutorial hell began. I felt that I have forgotten, or to be more precise,
that I did not know enough HTML and CSS, so I decided to brush up on my HTML and
CSS knowledge with two more courses: "Build Responsive Real-World Websites with
HTML and CSS" and "Advanced CSS and Sass: Flexbox, Grid, Animations and More"
both by Jonas Schmedtmann. Looking back I wouldn't say that these courses were
unnecessary or a waste of time, since they were heavily focused on design,
something that I'm interested in, and that I think about a lot while building
websites. Despite of all of this, I believe that this is the period where I
should have built more on my own.

### The Leap

Six months have already passed. My, how time flies! So as promised, I quit my
job in the office, and devoted myself completely to web development. The 3rd of
January 2022 was my last day at the office, and from the 7th of January 2022 I
started my developer workdays, eight hours a day, six days a week, as if I it
was a regular job. I've decided that Sundays were going to be days for rest and
spending time with the family. January was the month in which I've prepared my
development environment, both digital and physical, installed Linux and started
using it. Installing Linux as the sole operating system on a priorly
Windows-based desktop computer was a challenge on its own, but I learned a lot
from this process. I started to get more acquainted with the command line, and
started using version control to a greater extent, which you can see in my
contribution statistics on my [GitHub profile](https://github.com/akapetano). If
I had been using it for the previous six months, things could have been a lot
greener.

Of course, after going through HTML and CSS again in December, I had to go
through one more JavaScript course as well, right? And that was "JavaScript -
The Complete Guide 2022 (Beginner + Advanced)" by Maximilian Schwarzmüller.
However, I decided that at the same time, I would try to break away from the
tutorial hell a bit, and I started [JavaScript30](https://javascript30.com/), a
30-day vanilla JavaScript coding challenge by Wes Bos. The good thing about this
challenge was that, besides all of the many interesting projects that I got to
build, I also got a chance to experience pull requests. The code that I wrote
was reviewed by my mentor. I also completed "Git and GitHub - The Practical
Course" by Maximilian Schwarzmüller and Manuel Lorenz, and was now more familiar
with some advanced commands.

Now, this is the time when I started to have more confidence in my skills, but I
still wasn't there yet. I could not build a website on my own. At least not the
right way. I was lacking some more tools. I already had the idea for a
cryptocurrency website, Crypton, but I could not realize it. My mentor, Adrian,
advised me to learn React first, which I was planning on learning either way,
and then build Crypton. He also advised me to learn TypeScript which would
vastly improve my coding skills, and allow me to handle errors in a timely
manner.

In March 2022, I completed the "React - The Complete Guide (incl Hooks, React
Router, Redux)" and "Understanding TypeScript 2022" courses by Maximilian
Schwarzmüller. I was now finally ready to start building my own projects. But
then, the idea to build them with Next.js appeared. I already had a course lined
up for Next.js, but in the end I decided to only use
[Next.js's docs](https://nextjs.org/), which are phenomenal. I highly recommend
them.

### The Finish Line

Finally, we arrived to the present, or the past, depending when you're reading
this. I've started building this website on March 24th, 2022. It took me around
two weeks to finish it. The first building block of the website was Next.js's
["Create a Next.js App"](https://nextjs.org/learn/basics/create-nextjs-app)
tutorial on their website. With the help of it, I've built this blog page, and
all of the surrounding functionality which allows me to use
[Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/), the simple markup language, to write
blog posts. I had the blog page already, and that was an excellent starting
point.

For styling, as already mentioned at the beginning of this post, I used Chakra
UI. As a modular component library, Chakra UI allows you to add a color mode
easily. After doing the first switch to dark mode, something felt out of place.
My light mode profile picture was too cheerful for the surrounding dark theme.
Then it occurred to me. I need to make a second profile picture for the dark
mode which would switch accordingly. And so I made it, the dark side emerged. To
make things a bit more interesting, I've added the
[dynamic shadow image](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HMTyQjASff4) effect which
I saw on Chakra UI's official YouTube channel. A great source of inspiration in
terms of the minimalist design was the official website of
[Kent C. Dodds](https://kentcdodds.com/), one of the top React developers. I
like the setting and the rising of the sun and moon icon on his website a lot. I
wanted to implement something similar for my website, but in the end, I decided
for a simple color change of the icons without any animations.

For the portfolio page, and for the project showcase, I took inspiration from
Brad Traversy's course "Modern HTML and CSS From the Beginning (Including Sass)"
as part of which I built an example of a
[portfolio website](https://portfolio-website-andrija.netlify.app/). I've built
upon this idea, and added a modal which provides the user with more info about
the project.

The about page is fairly simple with some text, and two grids showcasing the
tools that I use during development. I just attached some tooltips to the icons
in case some of the users are not familiar with the icon of the tool. Since a
tooltip is primarily envisoned as a desktop tool, I had to make a custom tooltip
which was touch-friendly, i.e. appropriate for mobile devices.

In regards to the landing page or the home page, I did not want to clutter it
with too much content, as it was unnecessary, so I opted for a simple intro with
two buttons that guide the user further into the website. In this way, the pages
are interconnected and allow for a subtle and smooth user experience.

And that's it folks! This pretty much sums up the creation of this website, and
my ongoing developer journey up to this point. I hope for this post to be the
first among the many posts that I will write on this website, and I hope that
I'll soon get the chance to write one of them in the context of my first web
developer position.
